README.md, before:

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dblume/song-deduper/main/LICENSE.txt)
![python3.x](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.x-green.svg)

## Song De-Duper

Miscellaneous functions to de-duplicate songs. It uses the same fingerprints used by [MusicBrainz](https://musicbrainz.org/).

## Getting Started

There are two main ways to setup dependencies. Either:

- Install the fpcalc CLI executable, and the chromaprint Python script will invoke it. This is easier to setup.
- Install the libraries needed from source, and the chromaprint Python script will use them in-process.

### The easier to setup option: Use fpcalc CLI

#### 1. Install fpcalc (the executable)

Install [Chromaprint's fpcalc](https://acoustid.org/chromaprint) to get an executable
that makes audio fingerprints.

On macOS, you can download the executable, or brew install it.

#### 2. Install Python Modules

You may want to do this in a virtual environment (venv).

    python3 -m pip install pyacoustid mutagen

[Pyacoustid](https://github.com/beetbox/pyacoustid) is a wrapper around Chromaprint,
and won't work if you don't install Chromaprint or fpcalc too. In our case, we're going to use `fpcalc`.

You can't compare fingerprints with fpcalc, though. You need chromaprint for that.

[Mutagen](https://github.com/quodlibet/mutagen) reads and writes tags on MP3 and M4A
files. I started with [EyeD3](https://github.com/nicfit/eyeD3) but it only works with
MP3 files.

#### 3. Test acoustid and fpcalc with aidmatch.py

Use environment variable `FPCALC` so acoustid will know which engine to use.
"aidmatch.py" is a test script to ensure the installation went OK.

    FPCALC=chromaprint-fpcalc/fpcalc python3 aidmatch.py "Peaches.mp3"

### The harder option: Build dependencies locally

- Install [FFTW](https://www.fftw.org/download.html) for chromaprint. (`brew install fftw` for macOS)
- Install [ffmpeg audio-only](https://github.com/acoustid/ffmpeg-build) (go to releases) or build from source [ffmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html) for chromaprint.
- Get the [chromaprint source-code tarball](https://acoustid.org/chromaprint).

Then in chromaprint-1.5.1 (or current version) on a Macintosh, for example:

    FFMPEG_DIR=ffmpeg-5.1.2-audio-x86_64-apple-macos10.9/ cmake .
    make

Note that [chromaprint can be configured to use different FFT libraries](https://github.com/acoustid/chromaprint#fft-library).

Or, on Ubuntu:

    sudo apt-get install libavcodec-dev
    sudo apt-get install libavformat-dev
    cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_TOOLS=ON .
    make
    sudo make install

## Running

I'm just experimenting as I go. I want to de-dupe some songs on a PC iTunes archive,
and then de-dupe those with songs on an old macOS iTunes archive.

It turns out that most songs were moved or renamed. So matching on MD5 hashes is
better than trying to match on filenames.

Then comparing tags should be useful.

Finally, compare the audio fingerprints.

## Is it any good?

[Yes](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3067434).

## Licence

This software uses the [MIT License](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dblume/song-deduper/main/LICENSE.txt)

Commit message:

Improve output where more than two songs match.
Also add support for deleting songs and updating the database.

README.md, after:

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dblume/song-deduper/main/LICENSE.txt)
![python3.x](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.x-green.svg)

## Song De-Duper

Miscellaneous functions to de-duplicate songs. It uses the same fingerprints used by [MusicBrainz](https://musicbrainz.org/)
and does similar de-duplication to that of [Beets](https://beets.io/).

## Example Use

Run it on your music collection, and it'll print out which files are probably dupes. Here's three such files:

    Same ('Fiona Apple', 'Across The Universe'):
    ---- ---- /music/Fiona Apple - Across the Universe.mp3
    0.67 ---- /music/Google Play/Fiona Apple/Pleasantville -Music From The/01 Across The Universe.mp3
    1.00 0.67 /music/iTunes/Fiona Apple/When the Pawn Hits/11 Across The Universe.mp3

The above three files matched on artist and song. The first one starts with "---- ----" meaning no fingerprints were compared yet.
The second one starts with "0.67 ----" meaning it's a near match for the first one, but was not compared to the third one yet.
The third one starts with "1.00 0.67" meaning it's a dupe of the first one, and only a near match for the second one.

The truth is, the second file was a close enough match to delete too.

## Getting Started

There are two main ways to setup dependencies. Either:

- Install the fpcalc CLI executable, and the chromaprint Python script will invoke it. This is easier to setup.
- Install the libraries needed from source, and the chromaprint Python script will use them in-process.

### The easier to setup option: Use fpcalc CLI

#### 1. Install fpcalc (the executable)

Install [Chromaprint's fpcalc](https://acoustid.org/chromaprint) to get an executable
that makes audio fingerprints.

On macOS, you can download the executable, or brew install it.

#### 2. Install Python Modules

You may want to do this in a virtual environment (venv).

    python3 -m pip install pyacoustid mutagen

[Pyacoustid](https://github.com/beetbox/pyacoustid) is a wrapper around Chromaprint,
and won't work if you don't install Chromaprint or fpcalc too. In our case, we're going to use `fpcalc`.

You can't compare fingerprints with fpcalc, though. You need chromaprint for that.

[Mutagen](https://github.com/quodlibet/mutagen) reads and writes tags on MP3 and M4A
files. I started with [EyeD3](https://github.com/nicfit/eyeD3) but it only works with
MP3 files.

#### 3. Test acoustid and fpcalc with aidmatch.py

Use environment variable `FPCALC` so acoustid will know which engine to use.
"aidmatch.py" is a test script to ensure the installation went OK.

    FPCALC=chromaprint-fpcalc/fpcalc python3 aidmatch.py "Peaches.mp3"

### The harder option: Build dependencies locally

- Install [FFTW](https://www.fftw.org/download.html) for chromaprint. (`brew install fftw` for macOS)
- Install [ffmpeg audio-only](https://github.com/acoustid/ffmpeg-build) (go to releases) or build from source [ffmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html) for chromaprint.
- Get the [chromaprint source-code tarball](https://acoustid.org/chromaprint).

Then in chromaprint-1.5.1 (or current version) on a Macintosh, for example:

    FFMPEG_DIR=ffmpeg-5.1.2-audio-x86_64-apple-macos10.9/ cmake .
    make

Note that [chromaprint can be configured to use different FFT libraries](https://github.com/acoustid/chromaprint#fft-library).

Or, on Ubuntu:

    sudo apt-get install libavcodec-dev
    sudo apt-get install libavformat-dev
    cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_TOOLS=ON .
    make
    sudo make install

## Running

I'm just experimenting as I go. I want to de-dupe some songs on a PC iTunes archive,
and then de-dupe those with songs on an old macOS iTunes archive.

It turns out that most songs were moved or renamed. So matching on MD5 hashes is
better than trying to match on filenames.

Then comparing tags should be useful.

Finally, compare the audio fingerprints.

## Is it any good?

[Yes](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3067434).

## Licence

This software uses the [MIT License](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dblume/song-deduper/main/LICENSE.txt)
